=head1 SYNOPSIS

A math example: every elements of fibo below 1000 (1 element a time in memory)

    use Perlude;
    use Modern::Perl;

    sub fibo {
        my @seed = @_;
        sub {
            push @seed, $seed[0] + $seed[1];
            shift @seed
        }
    }

    now {say} takeWhile { $_ < 1000 } fibo 1,1;

A sysop example: throw your shellscripts away

    use Perlude;
    use strictures;
    use 5.10.0;

    # iterator on a glob matches stolen from Perlude::Sh module
    sub ls {
        my $glob = glob shift;
        my $match;
        sub {
            return $match while $match = <$glob>;
            ();
        }
    }

    # show every txt files in /tmp
    now {say} ls "/tmp/*txt

    # remove empty files from tmp
    
    now { unlink if -f && ! -s } ls "/tmp/*"

    # something more reusable/readable ? 

    sub is_empty_file { -f && ! -s }
    sub empty_files_of { filter {is_empty_file} shift }
    sub rm { now {unlink} shift }

    rm empty_files_of ls "/tmp/*./txt";

=head1 BASICS and TERMS

Perlude is a brunch of functions (mainly stolen from the haskell Prelude) that
ease programming with iterators by showing them as a stream (list of values that
may be computed) instead of a sequence of calls. If you're used to a
functionnal langage, the unix shell or the powershell: you're at home!

See a basic example (explanations and definition right after the code)

    sub seq { # the generator

        my $max = shift;
        my $x   = 1;

        sub { # the iterator construction

            # returning an empty list means that the stream is exhausted
            return if $x > $max;

            # else, return the next value of the stream
            # (undef is a valid value!)
            $x++;
        }
    }

    my $to5 = seq 5; # the iterator
    # remaining $to5 stream = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

    say "first iteration: ", $to5->();
    # prints 1
    # remaining $to5 stream = 2, 3, 4, 5

    say join ', ', map $to5->(), 1..100;
    # call the remaining stream: exhaustion

    say to5->();
    # says nothing: $to5 is an exhausted stream

    # folding: store a stream in a array

    $to5 = seq 75;

    # fold 50 first values
    my @first = map $to5->(), 1..50;

    # fold 25 last  values
    my @last = map $to5->(), 1..50;

C<seq> is a "generator": a function that returns an iterator.

C<$to5> is an "iterator": is a function can compute a complete list by the mean of releasing one element by call.

An "iteration" is the action of calling an iterator.

Folding a stream is the action of releasing a set of the stream values in an array.

We can see an empty list as a tail of any list as all those notations are equivalent

    1, 2, 3, 4, 5
    1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
    1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ()

So the empty list is used as convention to say that the stream is exhausted. Note that undef is a valid element of a stream. That's why is C<()> maybe called "bound" in this documentation. Note that Perlude functions are using array context to read the iterators so 

    return unless $something_to_release

will return () which is a valid way to end the stream

=head1 Function composition

When relevant, i used the Haskell Prelude documentation descriptions and examples. for example, the take documentation comes from http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/base/latest/doc/html/Prelude.html#v:take

=head1 Functions

=head2 Generators

=head3 range $begin, [ $end, [ $step ] ]

A range of numbers from $begin to $end (infinity if $end isn't set) $step by $step. 

    range 5     # from 5 to infinity
    range 5,9   # 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
    range 5,9,2 # 5, 7, 9

=head3 cycle @set

infinitly loop on a set of values

    cycle 1,4,7

    # 1,4,7,1,4,7,1,4,7,1,4,7,1,4,7,...

=head3 records $ref

given any kind of ref that implements the "<>" iterator, returns a Perlude compliant iterator.

    now {print if /data/} records do {
        open my $fh,"foo";
        $fh;
    };

=head3 as_open

just easier (yet safer?) to use wrapper on the sub described in C<perldoc -f open>
(also L<perlfunc/open>). 

the goal is to have an wrapper on open does a coercion (just return @_ if nothing to do). so

=over 2 

=item * 

don't carre about prototype (so you can call it with an array, not only a list)

=item *

return a FILEHANDLE instead of having a side effect on the first variable

=item *

just return a FILEHANDLE passed as argument (so it's a coercion from C<@_> to an open handler). 

    open FILEHANDLE
    open EXPR
    open MODE,EXPR
    open MODE,EXPR,LIST
    open MODE,EXPR,REF 

=back

=head3 lines


    now {say if /data/} records do {
        open my $fh,"foo";
        $fh;
    };


=head2 filters

filters are composition functions that take a stream and returns a modified stream.

=head3 filter

=head3 apply

=head3 take $n, $xs

take $n, applied to a list $xs, returns the prefix of $xs of length $n, or $xs itself if $n > length $xs:

    sub top10 { take 10, shift }

    take 5, range 1, 10
    # 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ()

    take 5, range 1, 3
    # 1, 2, 3, ()
    
=head3 takeWhile $predicate, $xs

takeWhile, applied to a predicate $p and a list $xs, returns the longest prefix (possibly empty) of $xs of elements that satisfy $p

    takeWhile { 10 > ($_*2) } range 1,5
    # 1, 2, 3, 4

=head3 drop $n, $xs

drop $n $xs returns the suffix of $xs after the first $n elements, or () if $n > length $xs:

    drop 3, range 1,5
    # 4 , 5 

    drop 3, range 1,2
    # ()

=head3 dropWhile $predicate, $xs

dropWhile $predicate, $xs returns the suffix remaining after dropWhile $predicate, $xs

     dropWhile { $_ < 3 } unfold [1,2,3,4,5,1,2,3] # [3,4,5,1,2,3]
     dropWhile { $_ < 9 } unfold [1,2,3]           # []
     dropWhile { $_ < 0 } unfold [1,2,3]           # [1,2,3]

=head2 misc

=head3 unfold $array

unfold returns an iterator on the $array ref so that every Perlude goodies can be applied. there is no side effect on the referenced array.

    my @lower = fold takeWhile {/data/} unfold $abstract

see also fold

=head3 pairs $hash

returns an iterator on the pairs of $hash stored in a 2 items array ref.

    now {
        my ( $k, $v ) = @$_;
        say "$k : $v";
    } pairs {qw< a A b B >};

aims to be equivalent to

    my $hash = {qw< a A b B >};
    while ( my ( $k, $v ) = each %$hash ) {
        say "$k : $v";
    }

except that:

=over 4

=item pairs can use an anonymous hash

=item can be used in streams

=item i hate the while syntax 

=back

=head2 Exhausters

=head3 now {actions} $xs

read the $xs stream and execute the {actions} block with the returned element
as $_ until the $xs stream exhausts. it also returns the last transformed element so that it can be used to foldl.

(compare it to perl6 "eager" or haskell foldl) 

=head3 fold $xs

returns the array of all the elements computed by $xs

    say join ',',      take 5, sub { state $x=-2; $x+=2 } # CODE(0x180bad8)
    say join ',', fold take 5, sub { state $x=-2; $x+=2 } # 0,2,4,6,8

see also unfold

=head3 nth $xs

returns the nth element of a stream

    say fold nth 5, sub { state $x=1; $x++ }
    # 5

=head3 chunksOf

non destructive splice alike (maybe best named as "traverse"? haskell name?).
you can traverse an array by a group of copies of elements

    say "@$_" for fold chunksOf 3, ['a'..'f'];
    # a b c
    # d e f

=head2 Composers

=head3 concat @streams

concat takes a list of streams and returns them as a unique one: 

    concat map { unfold [split //] } split /\s*/; 

streams every chars of the words of the text

=head3 concatC $stream_of_streams

takes a stream of streams $stream_of_streams and expose them as a single one.
A stream of streams is a steam that returns streams. 

    concatC { take 3, range $_ } lines $fh

take 3 elements from the range started by the values of $fh, so if $fh contains
(5,10), the stream is (5,6,7,10,11,12)

=head3 concatM $apply, $stream

applying $apply on each iterations of $stream must return a new stream. concatM
expose them as a single stream.

    # ls is a generator for a glob

    sub cat { concatM {lines} ls shift } 
    cat "/tmp/*.conf"

=head1 TODO

feedbacks are very welcome, todo list: 

    * Improve the doc

github

    http://github.com/eiro/p5-perlude

=head1 AUTHORS

=over 4

=item *

Philippe Bruhat (BooK)

=item *

Marc Chantreux (eiro)

=item *

Olivier MenguE<eacute> (dolmen)

=back

=head1 CONTRIBUTORS 

Burak Gürsoy (cpanization)

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

=over 4

=item *

Thanks to Nicolas Pouillard and Valentin (#haskell-fr), i leanrt a lot about
streams, lazyness, lists and so on. Lazyness.pm was my first attempt.

=item *

The name "Perlude" is an idea from Germain Maurice, the amazing sysop of
http://linkfluence.com back to early 2010.

=item *

Former versions of Perlude used undef as stream terminator. After my talk at
the French Perl Workshop 2011, dolmen suggested to use () as stream terminator,
which makes sense not only because undef is a value but also because () is the
perfect semantic to end a stream. So Book, Dolmen and myself rewrote the
entire module from scratch in the hall of the hotel with a bottle of chartreuse
and Cognominal.

We also tried some experiments about real lazyness, memoization and so on. it
becomes clear now that this is hell to implement correctly: use perl6 instead
:)

I was drunk and and mispelled Perlude as "Perl dude" so Cognominal collected
some quotes of "The Big Lebowski" and we called ourselves "the Perl Dudes".
This is way my best remember of peer programming and one of the best moment i
shared with my friends mongueurs.

=back
